<div class="wrapper">
<h1>Passions</h1>
<br>
Four months on from its release, Fetch the Bolt Cutters is the perfect album for 2020. 
Fetch the Bolt Cutters, the fifth studio album from Fiona Apple, was released in April 2020 to acclaim. The album earned a 10/10 rating from music review site Pitchfork and currently holds a 98/100 on Metacritic and 3.78/5 on famously deflationary fan review site RateYourMusic. The album was called “daring, (NYT)” “fascinating and complex, (Spin)” and “an unyielding masterpiece (Pitchfork).” 
The album’s release on April 17 came about one month after the start of lockdowns in the U.S. The lockdowns were still a novelty, though they were already disrupting most aspects of American life. NPR published a conversation on April 20 about the album, where Ann Powers hinted at the thesis of this piece: “You know, I mean, here we are: We're all alone together these days in our crazy-world situation. And what do we need more than a statement from one of the great artists about the power of creativity and making art in your home?” And it’s true, though it may be understated. It seemed almost a happy coincidence that Apple recorded the album in her home. Now, it is August and we are still mostly inside. What Ann Powers said in April is undeniably true, but the album goes beyond that now. The album says so much about this moment and it says it with teeth. Fiona Apple titled her album Fetch the Bolt Cutters after the track of the same name. On the track, Apple calls out “Fetch the bolt cutters/I’ve been in here too long” – a call for freedom from a cage, one with bars too stubborn to bend. Americans are trapped. Americans are inside our homes, which Fetch the Bolt Cutters beautifully showed us the power of in its rough, intimate recording. But Americans are trapped inside our homes, trapped inside our country, trapped inside an incompetent response to the coronavirus. Americans are in a cage looking out at the rest of the world as it marvels at us, a proud creature rendered helpless and lame, and we’re all yelling out to “Fetch the bolt cutters”. No one is answering, because who are we calling to? Those who wish to escape the cage of their homes are calling out to a pandemic that does not care. Those who wish to escape the pandemic call out to the nation to hunker down and just get through this thing, dammit, like the rest of the world. And the leaders of the country think they can just bend the cage bars or break the lock with their hands. 
Fiona Apple’s album is angry, and the country is angry. The country was angry in April 2020, too. The underestimation of coronavirus was already clear, but there was some hope. China was seeing a decent recovery. The lockdowns seemed temporary. Then, George Floyd was killed on May 25, 2020, and the lyrics of “Under the Table” came into focus. “Kick me under the table all you want/I won't shut up” and “I would beg to disagree/but begging disagrees with me” reflect the enough is enough attitude that shook the nation, a nation still trapped. The song “Relay” also reflects this period and its righteous anger. Though it is written about a relationship, like many songs on the album, it echoes anger toward the cyclical, systemic racism that has been passed through America’s history (“Evil is a relay sport/When the one who's burnt/Turns to pass the torch) and toward whiteness and white privilege (“I resent you presenting your life/Like a fucking propaganda brochure). 
“Heavy Balloon” is about Apple’s depression, but it captures the feelings of a nation pent up and experiencing hopelessness as the pandemic persists and nothing seems to change (“I've been sucking it in so long/That I'm busting at the seams”, and “Forcing all forms of life inside of me to retreat underground”). As we cross through this year, through a year that seems like a bridge between two normals, the renewed calls for criminal justice reform and police accountability show us that it is time to move toward a new normal, not return to an old normal. Apple closes the album with a determined mantra in “On I Go,” exalting movement: “On I go, not toward or away/Up until now it was day, next day/Up until now in a rush to prove/But now I only move to move.” 
Despite everything the album says about this moment, Fetch the Bolt Cutters is still intimate and angry for reasons having nothing to do with the world after April 17, 2020. How could it have predicted all that was truly to come? There’s plenty about FTBC that doesn’t directly reflect the chaos of 2020. Why should it? It was largely written and recorded before the pandemic spread to the U.S. and it was released before the Black Lives Matter protests of the summer. It dives into Apple’s relationships with the people around her, especially the women throughout her life, with tracks like “Ladies,” “Newspaper,” “Shameika,” and perhaps someone smarter than me can find those messages’ parallels with 2020. Fetch the Bolt Cutters, when it was released, did not seem very of the moment. It seemed timeless; Apple does not get into politics du jour or pop culture much. The album is grounded, but not inherently so in time or the news. Four months on, Fiona Apple’s album has settled into a place in the world without going anywhere. The gravity of Fetch the Bolt Cutters has pulled the world in closer, just to get more chances to listen.

<hr>
<p> <a href="/index.html">home</a> </p>
<p> <a href="/pages">pages</a></p>
</div>
